Oh, before you go, in fact, instead of writing it down, why don't you just tell
us your name so when we edit this we can say so-and-so said if we want to. Okay,
I'm Gene Van Troyer and I'm a science fiction writer as well as a writer of what
is called science fiction poetry. Right now I also edit a mainstream literary
magazine
which features among quote-unquote mainstream fiction and poetry, science
fiction and science fiction poetry. Okay, can you just say then a few words
about what science fiction poetry is, some of the classic examples perhaps?
Well, I really can't say what science fiction poetry is in terms of a definition
because no one has ever defined science fiction or poetry. So science fiction
poetry has no real definition, but I generally tend to class science fiction
poetry as something containing an element which is usually associated with
science fiction. In other words, a speculative element of outer space or of
biology or of time or whatnot. So that's my loose definition. I think it was
pointed out earlier that the epic of Gilgamesh would be nowadays considered to
be fantastic poetry. And it's important to realize that what we now are calling
science fiction poetry has been written in the so-called mainstream for a long
time. William Blake is a really primary example of someone who wrote mystical
poetry, but in order to do it he created alternate worlds and an ability to
travel between this world or the world of London that he knew and his imaginary
England which he called Albion. Well, that's fantasy. That's science fiction.
That's alternate world imagination.
In more modern times there's W.H. Auden who has written a number of poems which
would be scientifically oriented as well as science fictional because they
speculate about eventual results of scientific discoveries. One of the most
striking examples of what I would call science fiction poetry is something that
was done by Richard Wilbur, a well-established mainstream poet. And this poem is
called The Mind Reader. This is a poem about a person who actually reads minds
and he makes his living by reading minds. Now, I don't think Richard Wilbur
would call it science fiction, although maybe in the back of his mind he's
working with the idea that, well, this is usually a science fiction theme. But
it's really a very well-done poem. And the point about science fiction poetry
and mainstream poetry is that to be a good poem, a science fiction poem must
first be a good poem. And then content-wise it diverges from what we normally
recognize or would normally class as mainstream poetry. But there would be
nothing in terms of style that would differentiate? Any style can be used. You
can use it in very rigidly metered and rhymed poetic forms, which we usually
call traditional poetic forms, sestinas, sonnets, villanils, and so forth. Or it
can use the free verse or modern poetic techniques that you would see, say,
William Carlos Williams using or Charles Olson using. There was one more, too. I
was going to ask and it just slipped my mind.
Had something to do with Richard Wilbur or W.H. Auden? No, not with those
examples. Something just about the form itself, about science fiction poetry.
The content? Well, I sort of asked that already. It would have to do with the
content. Yeah, the content would be, as I said before, the elements which we
normally associate with science fiction or fantasy or speculative writing.
Whether it be a spaceship or a time machine or a scientific discovery. Telephone
ghosts, as Bob Frazier pointed out earlier. I think one thing that's important
to distinguish also is that science fiction poetry itself, I think, represents a
refusion of science and poetry. Up until the last decade, as a matter of fact,
it was very voguish, very faddish for poets and poetry-type people to view
poetry and art and science as mutually exclusive. And this is a totally
artificial separation because poetic expression comes from the same wellsprings
that the ordering process we see in science comes from. It's the need to put
order on the universe. Well, in the Renaissance, you didn't see this really
drastic split between science and art. They were viewed as being the same thing.
But I mentioned William Blake earlier, and it seems to me that around the time
of William Blake, disillusionment with the Industrial Revolution in science was
already setting in, and William Blake is rabidly anti-science. And personally, I
feel that he was mistaken in this particular aspect. But he looked around the
world that he saw, and things were terrible. People were enslaved almost by the
industrial system, and he was just rabidly opposed to it because it oppressed
the spirit. It oppressed the soul. Well, now, I think this is a forerunner of
the split that gradually grew from about the latter part of the 18th century up
until the present time in the 20th century. But it's gradually coming back
together, and you see a lot more science showing up in poetry and poets feeling
much more confident about expressing things out of science in their poetry, as
well as scientists falling back on poetry to explicate things. Good. Okay. I
thought of what I wanted. Just two more brief ones. Would you say that most of
the science fiction poetry being written today was more narrative or more lyric
and personal? A lot of the science fiction poetry that I've seen in science
fiction magazines that I've looked at that have been published over the last 50
years tends to be in a narrative form. A lot of poets and a lot of people who
read poetry in science fiction identify poetry as just another form of poetry or
another form of storytelling, I should say. And so a lot of it will be a
narrative or in a narrative framework. But it doesn't have to be in a narrative
framework to be a science fiction poem. And a lot of people, especially myself
or Bob Frazier or other people who are in the SFPA or who are not in the SFPA
are trying to use other forms, modern forms, lyrical forms, free verse, and so
forth as a means of science fiction poetic expression. Could you just one more?
Can you think, just to maybe rehash or add something to what Bob Frazier said
about some titles, either anthologies, individual poems, books that people might
go to if they want to read some? Well, the one collection of poems that comes to
mind would be Richard Wilber's Mind Reader and other poems. You see a lot of
fantasy stuff in Richard Wilber's work. Then he pointed out to Edward Lucy
Smith's Holding Your Eight Hands. There's also John Fairfax's Frontiers of
Going, which is a British book and contains primarily British writers. But it's
all space poetry, as John Fairfax calls it. Vas Dias. And then what was the
other one? Inside Outer Space by Vas Dias. Inside Outer Space by Vas Dias? Edited by
Vas Dias. Robert Vas Dias. Robert Vas Dias, yeah. It would be that. And then there was
a book edited by Richard, what was his name? Grossinger. Grossinger. It was
called EO. It was a series. Yeah, it was a series of poems that were subtitled A
Science Fiction Vision of Mars. No, it was a series of small press books. Just a
series of small press books. Yeah, but most of them were on themes and most of
them were fantastic. Okay, a series of small press books called EO on themes
that were primarily fantastic, science fictional and whatnot. Well, it's been
around for quite a while. It's only been really in recent years that the term
science fiction poetry came into usage. I think about 1974 was when the term was
first used and it was coined by, well, it wasn't coined by anybody, but it was
just used as a label by Peter Dillingham, who was an early prosodist and
theorist of science fiction poetry, and Stephen Gregg, who edited Eternity
Science Fiction, which was the first science fiction magazine to really
incorporate poetry as an integral part of its format. That's fine with me. Does
anybody, Bill or David, want to ask anything? That's fine. Good. Let me turn
that off. Thank you very much. Thank you. Listen, did you leave the information?